The leading motorsport technology publication since 1990 Leading-Edge Motorsport Technology Since 1990
Formula 1 2016 • Digital edition • www.racecar-engineering.com
Formula 1 2016

CONTENTS/COMMENT
How the all-new American grand
prix outfit has redefined what it is
to be a Formula 1 constructor
first new car for two years, the MRT05
Steve Sapsford lays out his vision
of what racing will look like in 2026
Simon McBeath and Miqdad Ali
investigate possible new
F1 aerodynamic regulations
27 IMPROVING OVERTAKING
Peter Wright looks at what has gone
wrong with the Formula 1 aero
regulations in recent years
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 3
From belly flops to pit stops
aving to work through February, I was fathom it. A ‘Driver of the Day’ may get people Ferrari’s F1 technology to compete in the WEC.
unable to join the family on the school voting, but how? Will the audience telephone a We are also a world away from the days
half-term holiday and so contented premium hotline and pay for the right to take part where every penny earned was spent on the car.
H myself with sitting at the computer ( ker-ching !), or will it be a free vote? Will there be The pits have become a place where Gucci is
during the day, and watching the television in the the obligatory 15-second delay between ‘and commonplace, rather than oil and grease. When
evening. I ended up at two favourites; Impractical the winner is…’ and announcing the recipient of a racing car is fired up the guests are forced out,
Jokers on Comedy Central, and The Jump on the award? On a more important note; why do their eyes streaming from the fumes, this is an
Channel 4. The first involves four friends setting this in the first place? If you want the drivers to be unwelcome surprise for them. It shouldn’t be.
each other embarrassing tasks and getting filmed heroes, unleash them to speak … There are huge technical advances that are
doing them. It’s funny in a very schoolboy-humour And now, in a bid to spice up Saturday, the being proven in motor racing, yet Formula 1 is not
way. One of the tasks was to get Joe to interrupt a most sensible qualifying system introduced celebrating its successes. Instead, it appears to be
diving competition, and belly flop his way through to racing is about to be made vastly more focussing on the negatives. Actually, it seems to
it. The dramatic change in skin colour front complicated. There will be a careful eye on the be focussing on the populist vote, rather than the
compared to back was noted after about five dives. clock; after seven minutes the slowest driver is sporting one. Its solution to dropping audience
‘We should probably only make him do figures is to change the product, not
one more,’ one of his friends said. to adapt to the way it is watched
The pits have become a place
The Jump involves a group of and embrace the internet, following
celebrities taking part in winter sports. NASCAR’s model.
The elimination round at the end of where Gucci is commonplace, And, I believe that racing is missing
each programme, a ski jump onto an the key factor; this could all be irrelevant
air-filled cushion, is almost redundant as rather than oil and grease in our lifetimes anyway. Driverless cars
the celebrities withdraw due to various are going to go on trial in the UK, sooner
injuries. A British Olympic gymnast had to have eliminated. And, thereafter, every 90 seconds the rather than later. The rise of the machines won’t
vertebrae fused after one accident, an Olympic same until the chequered flag. The commentators stop at the UK borders. How manufacturers will
swimmer dislocated her shoulder. An actress will have their work cut out as some drivers will be market and sell cars will change dramatically as the
dislocated her elbow. I started out wondering how out on track with a shout of making the 90-second Uber-style system takes over and our purchasing
they got the idea past the lawyers, and finished up cut to start the lap, and others won’t. habits change from buying cars to buying time in
applauding them for being able to do so. Somewhere along the line, F1 has seemed to cars. At that point, what happens to the marketing
Why this as a topic this month? Well, it all links have lost sight of what sport actually is. In these element of racing? I reckon it will need to go back
to the latest measures suggested to improve the pages Peter Wright explains how F1 could rescue to the pure element of sport to survive.
F1 ‘show’. Television is presenting an open goal, itself aerodynamically, and we will in the coming We need to remember why motor racing
and racing is reacting by discussing the optimum months Racecar will look at Formula 1’s proposals started in the first place. One fella says to another;
shape of the ball. The proposals laid out are, I am for its next generation cars in greater detail. But I ‘mine’s faster than yours’, and the race is on. It is
sure, based in logic, but from the outside I can’t think F1 has some far more serious problems. simple, and we don’t need to over-complicate the
The decision-making processes are taking F1 process. Appealing to the television audience,
so far away from what it should be that I do start and then reaching that audience, is important to
CONTENTS to wonder; what is the ultimate goal? VW has once finance the technology, but I would argue that it is
4 F1 2016 REGULATIONS again delivered its verdict on the category – that a secondary requirement, not a primary one.
A look at the late rule changes ahead F1 is not stable enough to warrant the investment
of the new grand prix racing season needed to succeed. Alfa Romeo on the other hand ANDREW COTTON
is looking to go in, although it could develop Editor, Racecar Engineering
The revived Manor F1 team has produced its

FORMULA 1 – RULE CHANGES
Regulation
By SAM COLLINS
design and operation of the cars. development staff with Ferrari?
the wording has been tightened to count any designs for its cars in 2016.
‘representation of a F1 car or sub components’
Power units is another area that was in the
4 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Homologation deadlines will also create
Some of the sporting regulation changes for 2016
are likely to have a big impact on the F1 teams
ormula 1’s rulebook is a major topic the legality of the situation. Whiting passed
of speculation, negotiation and the responsibility of making a decision on the
uncertainty at the moment. But shortly issue to the stewards at the Abu Dhabi race. The
F before Christmas the FIA did release main points of Lowe’s queries were as follows:
the latest set of sporting regulations, which could Haas F1, as a non-competitor, share data
contained a number of areas which impact the with Ferrari, and could it share design and
One major area which has changed The answers from the Abu Dhabi stewards
substantially for some teams is aerodynamic were clear. Under the rules as they are written,
development operations. While the restrictions Haas could indeed share data with Ferrari, as at
on tunnel occupancy remain much as they were the time Haas was not a Formula 1 competitor
in 2015, with a maximum model size of 60 per and, as the testing could be deemed to be
cent and a max wind speed of 50m/s, there of benefit to both Haas and Ferrari, and not While tunnel time limits remain much the
have been clarifications on what counts toward exclusively for Ferrari, then that too was same as in 2015 the F1 teams will be required
the CFD. In 2015, restricted flow only counted permissible. Sharing staff was also permissible, to provide the FIA with date-stamped digital
if it was used on a full size F1 car, but in 2016 though Haas could not simply use Ferrari’s photography of wind tunnel testing this year
though engine simulation remains unrestricted. Prancing Haas now been formalised and it will now be possible
In the wind tunnel, operations has changed For 2016 only, the rules have been clarified for older power units to be re-homologated and
slightly too, with teams now required to take and Haas can no longer share data with Ferrari, used by customer teams. Toro Rosso is the first
two digital photographs of the working section but at this point in the development of both team to do this and will use a 2015 Ferrari unit
(including the model) before each run. The the Haas and the Ferrari the work is all finished while Haas, Sauber and the Scuderia will use
pictures have to have a date stamp and show and the cars have now run. It also means that the 2016 version of the PU.
the complete model clearly (hence two pictures, Haas and Ferrari can no longer share staff and As we closed for press discussions about
front and rear quarter views). These pictures this may include the head of the Haas aero using only three units per season from 2017
must then be supplied along with the various programme Ben Agethangelou who still lists were very much ongoing, but in 2016 teams
other data to the FIA technical department. himself as a Ferrari employee on his Linkedin will be allowed five units per driver due to
Wind tunnel operations have also changed profile (though the team insist that he is a full there being 21 races on the calendar. This is an
for teams in 2016 by a rules clarification issued time Haas staff member). Staff will now have increase from the four allowed in 2015 when
at the 2015 Abu Dhabi Grand Prix. During the to pick which team they are working for and if there were only 19 grands prix, and it is also a
season Mercedes had become rather concerned they want to switch from one team to another notable decrease in the required life expectancy
about the relationship between Haas and they must take a minimum of six months of each power unit – something which might
Ferrari. In the end Paddy Lowe wrote a long gardening leave. How this, a race stewards’ well come as a relief to some. However, to other
and detailed letter to Charlie Whiting about decision, sits with employment law in the engine builders it might well mean the return of
European Union is not clear. one-race performance specials.
It will now be possible for spotlight at the end of the 2015 season, not something of a voyage into the unknown for the
least due to the somewhat self inflicted situation power unit manufacturers, the confusion caused
older power units to be that the Red Bull teams found themselves in. In by the omission of a power unit deadline in the
the past, manufacturers could only homologate 2015 rules, which led to in-season development
re-homologated and a single specification of power unit a year being allowed, will not be repeated.
(Manor was allowed to use the 2014 Ferrari unit Modifications for safety, cost and reliability
used by customer teams under a waiver agreed by all teams). That has can still be made and in-season development

by 14 February, which meant the PU designs had to be signed off before the engines had run on a circuit
within the token system will continue and is power units had to be signed off before they
now officially part of the rules. had ever been run on track.
For 2016 the homologation deadline for The loophole which in the past would
here that the FIA perhaps did not remember not also an entrant, Renaultsport, Honda or
that 2016 is a leap year), and design dossiers arguably even Mercedes HPP, to have used
had to be submitted two weeks prior to that an old car to run on track outside of the
(yep, on St Valentine’s day). usual restrictions had been closed. Now the
One area which has
changed is aerodynamic
development operations
Tyre rules
or 2016 new tyre usage regulations will be in
force in Formula 1, along with a new ‘ultrasoft’
F compound. The new rules are intended to give
teams more freedom in strategy and allow for less
predictable racing, at least in theory.
Before each race Pirelli will select which three tyre
compounds to take to the track and let the teams know
what is on offer. The Italian firm will then nominate two
mandatory sets of tyres for each car for the race itself,
obviously being the same for all, though only one set
of the two has to be used in the race. One set of the
softer compound tyres will be reserved for use in
the final segment of qualifying.
Beyond that the tyre usage becomes free with teams
able to select whatever compound they want within the
three nominated by Pirelli for each weekend. However,
the teams have to make this tyre selection eight weeks in
advance for European races, so that they can be produced
in time. If a team misses the deadline the FIA will make the
tyre selection for it. That selection deadline is extended to
14 weeks in advance of a flyaway race, so teams needed
to select tyres for the opening races before Christmas
for Australia, something which might have proved tricky
considering none had actually run a 2016 car, and one
team, Haas, had never run an F1 car! Total amount of tyres
used per weekend (13 sets per car) remains unchanged.
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 5
F1 winter testing began on 22 February, yet design dossiers for the power units had to be submitted to the FIA
power units came on 28 February (one suspects have allowed a power unit supplier which was
The trouble with this was, winter testing did testing ban applied to not only teams but The tyre usage regulations have been changed for 2016 with the
not begin until 22 February, meaning that the also power unit suppliers and ‘third parties’. hope of spicing up the show with less predictable race strategies

FORMULA 1 – HAAS F1
can help it succeed where others have failed
By SAM COLLINS
6 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Born in the USA
Bringing a new team into Formula 1 is the toughest job
in the sport, but Haas F1 believes its unique approach
ene Haas has always done things a four teams to have won all of the three major and all struggling and I told Gene “they will
little differently, rarely following a NASCAR championships. never catch up”. F1 is such a high technological
path just because it is the one But in 2010 F1 discussions started between level it was always going to be impossible for
G most trodden. He built up his Haas, Joe Custer (then the VP of Stewart Haas), them. Just to get where the others are will cost
eponymous machine tool business exactly this and Gunther Steiner, the Italian former Red you billions and takes five to ten years, not one
way, looking at his competition and working out Bull Racing technical director who in recent or two. An OEM maybe could do it but if an OEM
what not to do, and as a result created a range years has run a composites business in North came in they would buy a team and not start
of lower cost, easy to use designs. Carolina. The strategy they came up with was from scratch, perhaps Porsche is the exception
Now Haas has decided to bring this ethos that Haas would launch his own Formula 1 with its WEC programme, but even they would
to grand prix racing, gaining an entry into the team, but not in the same way as the likes of struggle as it’s such a big step from LMP1 to F1. I
Formula 1 World Championship with an all new Caterham, Marussia and HRT. don’t think Audi could do it because it’s not all in
American based team. It is of course not the ‘When we first started discussing this house, they use a lot of contractors.’
Californian’s first foray into motor racing, his project four or five years ago I told Gene that By 2014 the trio soon felt that they had
NASCAR team (co-owned with Tony Stewart) you cannot do everything from scratch,’ Steiner a workable business model and lodged an
has won the Sprint Cup twice and is one of only reveals. ‘At the time the new teams were racing official application for entry into the 2015 World

Haas quickly deferred the entry to 2016 as
the team, and indeed the regulations, were
not quite ready for what was planned
FORMULA 1 www.racecar-engineering.com 7
Championship season. This was accepted but had to use a bespoke chassis, front impact partnership with Ferrari, which sees the Italian
Haas quickly deferred the entry to 2016 as the structure, suspension, suspension geometry, company supply the newcomers with not only
team, and indeed the regulations, were not radiators, bodywork, steering system, brakes, power unit and gearbox, but much more.
quite ready for what was planned. Steiner by floor and fuel tank. But a very quiet change to ‘We have the front suspension, rear
this point had been appointed team principal the F1 Sporting regulations at the start of the suspension, hydraulics, steering, electronics all
and Custer chief operating officer. 2014 season changed what it meant to be a F1 from Ferrari. Radiators we have to do as that
constructor. The 2014 definition allowed teams is classified as bodywork apparently,’ Steiner
Regulation changes to buy everything but the chassis, front impact admits. ‘We are using these things to focus on
But it was some quiet changes to the F1 structure, suspension, suspension geometry, the overall car design, why make an effort to do
regulations that really got the ball rolling. ‘We brake ducts and bodywork. In 2015 the rule our own damper or something when we can
are not starting from nothing, our mechanical changed again to remove the requirement just get them from Ferrari? They [were] second
parts will come from Ferrari, our approach is for teams to design their own suspension, in the championship and have won races, so we
completely different to everyone else,’ Steiner suspension geometry and brake ducts. know that they are fine. We will have everything
says. This is because F1 teams had had to be Haas is so far the only team which plans to the same as Ferrari in 2016.’
full constructors and this meant that they fully exploit these stealthy rule changes via a All this means that the Haas team has

FORMULA 1 – HAAS F1
Haas has succeeded in business by doing things his own way –
now he’s hoping that approach will pay dividends in Formula 1
8 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
The Haas factory is in the very heart of NASCAR country in North Carolina, next door to the Stewart-Haas
team. It’s located very close to the Charlotte Motor Speedway and the Haas-owned Windshear wind tunnel
Gene Haas has already tasted success on the race track with As befits a Formula 1 race team owned by a successful businessman, the Kannapolis premises are plush.
the crack NASCAR operation that he co-owns with Tony Stewart Haas also has an in-season European race team base at the old Marussia factory at Banbury in the UK
focussed all its design efforts entirely on the would have to put in IT infrastructure, HR, hire newly appointed chief aerodynamicist, Ben
bodywork and chassis, hugely streamlining the the right staff, but Dallara already has all of that,’ Agathangelou, had to find a suitable facility.
process of designing and constructing a modern Steiner says. ‘I have known Dallara for years and One early idea was to adapt Windshear in order
grand prix car. Steiner continued ‘We were I know the strong points of the company as well to accept 60 per cent models, but converting
focussed on the wetted surfaces, cooling as the weak points. Dallara’s engineers have not the huge working section designed primarily for
system and the chassis.’ been exposed to proper F1 for some time and NASCAR racing to something that would meet
The design and construction of the chassis they accept that. So we use their, infrastructure, the demands of F1 would be difficult.
would become a joint project between the Haas engineers and designers as well as putting our ‘Adapting it, we knew you could do it, you
engineers and the staff of Dallara in Italy. own highly experienced people in there like Rob could put a sting in like a normal tunnel, but it
‘Dallara was a good choice for us because we Taylor [who worked with Steiner at Red Bull in would be very big, or change the scales under
massively reduced the ramp up time, they 2006]. Rob is the best lead designer you could the belt, it was all doable, but would have to
were already 80 per cent there,’ Steiner says. ask for, he is calm, very intelligent and listens to still be adaptable to NASCAR as that is the main
‘They have very good people there like Andrea everyone. He is sitting at Dallara directing the business there. That switching was one of the
Vecchi who are not only engineers but very guys there and managing the car design.’ concerns, it was possible but at what price,
good project managers.’ The aerodynamic design has a similar and what risk? We felt it was just easier to do a
set-up but the choice of wind tunnel was 60 per cent model and go somewhere designed
Italian connection not a straightforward one for the new team, for model testing. We are developing a racing
But to say the 2016 Haas VF-16 is a Dallara Haas already owns the vast 180mph full scale car, not a wind tunnel, so we decided not to
would not be correct, this project is very moving belt Windshear facility in Concord, adapt Windshear for the time being. Maybe in
definitely being run by the Haas engineers. ‘We North Carolina, once often utilised by F1 teams a few years we will look at it again.’ So the hunt
have blended our people with Dallara’s because but deemed illegal some years ago. Now no was on for a suitable tunnel, and that meant
you cannot do everything from scratch, it takes team may conduct wind tunnel testing at looking beyond the USA.
time to build things up, to do it from scratch you more than 60 per cent scale. Steiner and his ‘We could have rented Dallara’s tunnel but it

Pristine race bays awaiting the first 2016 chassis back in 2015. These have a heavy Italian Haas made a fortune in CNC so it’s no surprise there’s a well-equipped machine
influence, with Dallara design input and plenty of parts supplied by the Ferrari F1 operation shop. A big 5-axis machine specially designed for the team has been installed
While there is plenty of meeting space at the US headquarters Haas F1 has invested heavily in There were just eight people working in the Kannapolis machine shop when we
state of the art video conferencing kit so that it is able to keep in touch with its team in the UK visited the site in the summer of 2015. Stewart-Haas shop next door is also used
is only 50 per cent and we wanted to test at autoclaves and a clean room. However, for at
this for the next two three years.’ One major to do all the composites in house, but it’s
was that Agathangelou had recently overseen can manage at first.’ Steiner says. ‘We already
Haas staff are based at Ferrari but the main bulk could put the machines in but you still need
are to be found at Dallara. the people. It’s very difficult to find good
in Italy, the organisation’s main base would F1 team is set up another composites shop
be in a large purpose-built facility next door from scratch. Dallara are very good at things
space waiting. This includes a space for a full Indeed, for Haas the machining and
Haas is so far the only
team which plans to fully
FORMULA 1 www.racecar-engineering.com 9
60 per cent. Ferrari had capacity so we least 2016 and probably 2017 the composites
decided to use it. We plan to continue like work will be done in Europe. ‘We are prepared
factor in choosing to use the facility at Ferrari difficult and you have to only take on what you
its modernisation. A few of the Italian based have the rooms set aside and laid out and we
composites people in the USA, it took me years
Home base to build up my company Fibreworks, and the Gunther Steiner, pictured left in discussion with team owner Gene
However, the entire team was not to be based last thing I want to do when setting up a new Haas, is the technical director at the Haas Formula 1 operation
to the existing Stewart-Haas NASCAR team like wings and deflection because they have to
in Kannapolis, NC, and it is clear that the plan do it on other projects all of the time. They own
is for the entire design and manufacturing a composite manufacturer so they can produce
operation to move into the new factory. It has what we need and they are very good at that.
been deliberately designed with redundancy So we will have most of the composites done exploit these stealthy
so that as the team expands its US staffing level in Europe and focus on the bits we are good at
and manufacturing capacity it already has the like machining and fabrication.’ rule changes, via a
composites facility including mountings for the fabrication is an obvious point of focus, when partnership with Ferrari

FORMULA 1 – HAAS F1
Haas has played the
regulations very cleverly
and will have the Ferrari
other choice Scuderia
disposal next season
10 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Racecar visited the facility a large new 5-axis unoccupied, but will rapidly fill as the team Here the links with the NASCAR team start
machine was being installed, a prototype grows. ‘We have about 20 people in the CFD to become apparent, while the engineers do
specifically designed for the team. In another group at the moment by [2016] that will be not work on both, an experienced engineer
area a large machine shop kitted out with the about 20, right now the main engineering work from Stewart Haas is playing a key role. ‘That
latest Haas CNC equipment was working on car we are doing here in Kannapolis is the CFD. CFD group is run by Matt Borland, who was the
parts and pit equipment. It is complemented I think we have about four Phds in the CFD technical director at the Stewart Haas NASCAR
by the equally well-equipped machine shop group at the moment’ Steiner claims. The group team for a long time, he is responsible for
next door at Stewart-Haas Racing. of CFD engineers are disarmingly young, many managing the knowledge transfer between the
‘The guys in the machine shop are primarily of them relatively recent graduates, but this is two. Technical approaches and methodologies
working on parts for the wind tunnel model’ something Steiner sees as an advantage. ‘We things like that,’ Steiner explains.
Steiner says. ‘I think about 50 per cent of the do have a lot of young guys in the team, but The CFD cluster used by Haas F1 is not
parts on the model are made here, all the for CFD especially there are no old guys who located in the USA and this highlights how
metal components, while all the SLA [3D know the cutting edge technology. These guys misfortune for some can be good fortune for
printing] parts are done at Dallara. [In 2016] are scientists really and therefore it’s a good others. The collapse of the Marussia team in
we will make 100 per cent of the scale model thing to have the CFD here, they don’t need the late 2014 came just at the right time for Haas
parts here, but right now Dallara has eight big Formula 1 experience they just need to be F1 which was not only looking for a cluster but
SLA machines and we are waiting to install clever people that know how to use computers a European base of operations for the racing
our first. We made the pit equipment here and and understand physics. team, the near demise of the then Russian-
filled a shipping container with it all. We make branded Manor operation gave Haas both of
all that kind of stuff here, USA is the home of Young talent the things he was looking for. He acquired
fabrication. Making this stuff in the USA is much ‘We have bright people here from good the former Marussia HQ in Banbury and
cheaper than in Europe. It takes about two days universities, we think actually it’s better to some of the equipment within.
to ship the parts from here to Dallara so we have them here so we keep them out of the ‘The designers and the wind tunnel
know that something that if you were doing in mainstream of CFD in F1, and we are doing programme are in Italy and the race team is in
Europe would take four days, we would take some very interesting and different things in England. We have the CFD engineers here in
five instead as it takes two days rather than one that area. I expect we will reach the maximum the USA but the cluster is at Banbury. Marussia
to ship. But we know that and factor that into allowed next season, we are doing some heavy had quite a good cluster, quite new as they
the production schedules.’ stuff already. At the moment we can do what had to replace it about nine months before
In the plush design offices on the first we like, the usage restrictions do not apply until the team collapsed. It was very difficult to take
floor of the new factory much of the space is next year so we are doing a lot of stuff.’ out the cluster and re-install it somewhere so
To say the 2016 Haas is a Dallara would not be correct. This
project is very definitely being run by the Haas engineers

Complete vehicle system simulation
Using physical modelling tools to simulate the complete vehicle leads to
a better understanding of the system behaviour and interactions enabling
system level optimisation.
n Multi-domain modelling
and simulation using
Modelica
n Libraries for Powertrain,
Hybrid vehicles,
Vehicle Dynamics,
Thermal
Management
and Driver-in-the-loop
n Full support for the
FMI standard
in the design office, integrated into the
trackside tools and telemetry systems
and used for HiL and DiL testing.
As the complexity of today’s vehicles and control we need to use system Using Dymola, Claytex has produced
increases due to hybridisation, more level modelling and simulation tools complete vehicle system models for
advanced driver assistance systems that can create predictive models studying engines, drivelines, vehicle
and many other active systems it covering all of these domains. dynamics, thermal management,
becomes increasingly important to hybrid technologies and body
Dymola is a multi-domain modelling
be able to simulate how the complete systems. These have been applied
and simulation tool that uses the
vehicle system behaves and interacts. extensively in Formula 1, NASCAR and
Modelica modelling language to
Using simulation from the start of the IndyCar enabling the teams to evaluate
describe the behaviour of components,
project enables design decisions to and optimise new technologies and
devices and systems. This capability
be influenced and optimal system ideas before arriving at the track. In
is encapsulated into a wide range
solutions to be found. motorsport these models are deployed
of application libraries covering
As the complete vehicle system covers engines, powertrains, batteries, electric
many different domains including drives, vehicle dynamics, thermal
mechanics, electrical, thermal, fluid management and human comfort.
Systems Engineering Specialists
Edmund House | Rugby Road | Leamington Spa | CV32 6EL | UK
Telephone +44 1926 885900 Email sales@claytex.com

FORMULA 1 – HAAS F1
Right: The show car is actually a 2013 Marussia bought at the
auction at which Haas also acquired its UK team base
Below: The VF-16’s testing programme was hit with technical
issues but the team managed to turn a respectable 474 laps,
while its speed seemed to suggest it might run in the midfield
12 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
we decided to leave it where it was. We have engineering and it is an efficient way of going Steiner makes it clear just what the team’s own
since put in MPLS lines between the sites we racing, right in line with the philosophy of Gene performance expectations are. ‘I don’t want to
are using, and while it costs quite a bit it means Haas: ‘Our approach is different but could be make big claims because we will be judged on
we have very fast data transfer. We have also copied and that could be good for F1,’ Steiner the race track not before. In the first year we
invested quite a lot in video conferencing says. ‘We don’t want to buy our way to success, are not out there to beat Ferrari or Mercedes,
between the facilities, it’s much better to see we have a fair budget but we are trying to do that’s not our target. But it’s important to say
people than just on the phone. Especially when things the most efficient way, not cheap, not we do not want to be last. I’m not going racing
its all new and you need to get to know the low budget but efficient. just to be there, just to be in Formula 1, and nor
people you work with’ Steiner says. ‘Sometimes that means doing things is Gene. Our aim is not just to participate, for
Beyond housing the cluster the Banbury outside of the box. Gene Haas has based his us our aim is to get points, to be competitive.
facility is to be used primarily as a base for the whole business on being efficient. It’s not just To win is difficult and will take time but to get
new racing team and it does not have any kind about throwing money at it and if it does points that is what we must do.’
of manufacturing capabilities, though it not work then we are bankrupt in three Testing was mixed for Haas, and while it
does have some inspection areas and non- years as others have done before it is about looked good at the start the usual teething
destructive testing equipment. spending the money wisely.’ problems soon caught up with it. Even so, it
Some may believe that the new definition With Ferrari supplying much of the 2016 managed 474 laps, which isn’t bad, and looked
of a F1 constructor being used by Haas is some Haas car it perhaps could be expected that it quite fast, too. Indeed, going into the Australian
way down the slope towards full customer cars, could be rather more competitive than the GP many expected that Haas could get
but Steiner argues that it is still a major piece of cars of other new teams in recent years, and those targeted points at the first attempt.
‘Testing was mixed for Haas, and while it looked good at the start the
usual teething problems soon caught up with the new team’

TECHNOLOGY – FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
By PROFESSOR STEVE SAPSFORD
Motorsport might look very different in the future
and autonomous vehicles will surely play their part
industry given the drivers from the regulators, drawn from this position.
14 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
The grid of the future
Ever wondered what the top motorsport series would look like in
10 years’ time? Here’s one very carefully considered opinion
any in the motorsport industry thinking and incorporation of new drivers or
will be familiar with the technologies was allowed. However, please note
motorsport technology roadmap, that this analysis is predicated on the existing
M an attempt to map out the future dominance of internal combustion-based
technology requirements for the motorsport powertrains, and so most comparisons are
the fans and the requirements of the associated There are two main routes towards low
automotive industry. At the MIA Energy Efficient carbon vehicles (Figure 2) ; improve overall
Motorsport Conference, Chris Aylett (CEO MIA), vehicle efficiency and reduce the amount of Audi’s experimental e-fuels are likely to be
asked me to go a step further, and predict what carbon in the fuel. For the first of these, the developed and proven in the motorsport arena
the grid of the future may look like, across a main focus is on downsized, boosted engines
variety of classes of motorsport. combined with hybridisation supervised by categories of motorsport, all with slightly
I was initially asked to look at the potential intelligent and integrated control systems. different drivers, and then tried to determine
grid in both five and 10 years’ time, but I quickly The second method focuses on reducing what I think will be the main features of the
came to the conclusion that five years hence the amount of carbon in the fuel, either propulsion system, transmission and driveline
was too soon for any meaningful changes to be through the use of low carbon electricity or the system and the energy recovery/storage.
implemented, so I settled on 10 years. generation of synthetic fuels. The important I purposely confined my analysis to the
The main purpose of the roadmap is point here is that it is not simply a universal powertrain and only highlight the potential
to predict the technologies that will be move to electric vehicles. When assessing the impacts of those systems on the vehicle.
required in order to help guide investment total environmental impact, one must also take So, to the grid ( Table 1 ).
decisions regarding technology and product into account that the electricity and its storage
development. So, one method of predicting (batteries, capacitors etc.) has to come from Formula 1
the future should be to draw a line down somewhere. This is a critical consideration when The powertrain is already highly integrated,
the roadmap ( Figure 1 ) at 2025 and read off calculating the overall vehicle life-cycle which so I expect this to continue. There is potential
what it says. However, I did not force myself to needs to include the carbon involved in fuel/ to reduce engine capacities further so it
follow this process religiously as this does not energy production, vehicle production, through would not be surprising to see 3- or 4-cylinder
take account of disruptive policy changes or life usage and, eventually, recycling. engines coupled with more powerful electric
technologies – some room for independent In this exercise I have considered four motors and/or flywheel-based technology

Figure 1: Motorsport Technology Roadmap and potential technologies in 2025. The Roadmap is an attempt to map out the future technology requirements for the motorsport industry
World Touring Cars and other tin-top categories will Split cycle engines could drive thermal efficiencies The main focus for Formula E must be to complete
continue to follow the lead of the road car industry towards 60 per cent in the less regulated WEC a full race distance on a single charge
for maximum efficiency. Reducing the through them, for reasons of entertainment. Waste heat recovery and cryogenics are a
carbon content of the fuel is one of the main Waste heat recovery will still feature, natural part of these split cycle engines and so
opportunities for reducing CO2. So I am although I do expect advances in this these technologies would be exploited, too.
proposing here the use of synthesised fuel from area, especially through heat-to-electricity
be recovered, but most of that is on the front cent. If we imagine operating such an engine
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 15
sunlight or other renewable sources of energy. technologies in the exhaust and cooling World Touring Cars
This process basically combines hydrogen systems. More intelligent cooling will result in This is included primarily to force us to think
generated by electrolysis with sequestrated reduced requirements for heat rejection from about costs. With the focus on downsized,
CO2 to generate methane, methanol and other the vehicle and hence reduced radiator sizes boosted engines in production cars, it is not
related fuels. Effectively this means that the and associated apertures. surprising that WTCC cars have moved to the
CO2 released during the combustion process is same configuration as the base technology has
mostly replacing CO2 you have already captured World Endurance become increasingly available and understood.
from some other process and combined with With the freest regulations, we may expect to If we project that model forward, I see a
the hydrogen to generate the fuel, and so on. see more diversity in the technologies here. significant move towards 48V architectures for
It should be noted that there are biologically- We will continue with similar powertrains but I our everyday cars as inevitable, so why would
based processes that achieve the same effect would expect to see more intense integration we not expect to exploit this technology in
but take the CO2 directly from the atmosphere. of those systems and more aggressive use of even our more cost-conscious categories in the
Regarding the transmission and driveline, disruptive technologies. For example, Ricardo is future? Powertrains will already have integrated
the focus will be on further light-weighting, currently working on split cycle engines, where starter/generator systems of 10-15kW and
perhaps using metal foam-filled gears which are we use one set of cylinders for compression (relatively) low cost energy storage, so why not
encased in a hardened shell. and another set for combustion, that could exploit/extend that to provide ‘push-to-pass’,
There is still substantial energy available to drive thermal efficiencies towards 60 per ‘fan boost’ etc., and improve the engagement?
axle, so I do not think it will be long before under a restricted number of speeds and loads Formula E
energy recovery through regenerative braking and transmitting this power through a CVT One of the main purposes of the motorsport
will be available through the front wheels, and highly electrified drivetrain, substantial technology roadmap was to align drivers
even if we are not allowed to transmit torque improvements in performance are possible. from the motorsport sector with those of the

TECHNOLOGY – FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
Table 1: The grid of the future for various classes of motorsport
16 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
in many of our categories of racing will be
the e-enabled driveline. With the increasing
electrification of the powertrain generally,
it makes sense to use the electric machines
and control systems to manage the amount
of torque delivered to each individual wheel,
thereby creating e-AWD capabilities and
reducing the requirement for sophisticated
transmission systems.
The one subject we have not yet mentioned
is that of autonomous vehicles. I am confident
that we will see classes for fully autonomous
racing in the not-too-distant future. However,
I think some aspects of autonomy could easily
stretch into other categories. Here I am thinking
particularly of WEC, where we have different
classes of vehicle racing on the same track,
sometimes under difficult conditions (night,
flags would be entirely feasible, but inter-
Figure 2: Routes to low carbon vehicles rain etc.). Autonomous driving under yellow
automotive sector in order to ensure that accelerated development of these alternative class accident prevention may also be
road-relevant research and development was technologies such that these will be common possible, and this would provide an excellent
carried out. This was to encourage/ensure place on the grid in 10 years’ time. platform for develop high speed vehicle-to-
main vehicle OEM involvement in our sport. That, coupled with the possible exploitation vehicle communications.
With the freedoms allowed in FE this season, of superconducting materials enabled by a In this article, I have postulated some
teams are carrying out internal development cryogenic cooling system, will enable significant potential features of the grid of the future,
programmes on, for example, electric motor improvements in drivetrain efficiency. hopefully with some reasoned arguments. The
design. In the search for ultimate efficiency However, the main focus for FE must be to one thing I can guarantee is that I will be wrong!
and performance they are, of course, focusing complete a race distance on a single charge. However, I still firmly believe that we all gain the
on rare earth, permanent magnet machines. I suspect that this is less than 10 years away, greatest benefit when motorsport regulations
However, due to costs and security of supply, but it is likely to require a combination of are aligned with the technology roadmaps of
the automotive industry is focusing its efforts advancements in battery technology coupled the automotive industry. Motorsport is an ideal
on the development of alternative motor with some form of dynamic charging. This is also place to accelerate the development of relevant
technologies such as induction or synchronous where fuel cells may first appear in motorsport, technologies that can then be used as a great
reluctance machines. As a result, I hope that as the basis of the initial charging system, if they showcase to firstly raise awareness, then enable
in the near-to-mid-term future, there will be are powered by low carbon hydrogen. acceptance, and finally stimulate demand
some form of regulation that will encourage An important feature of the future drivetrain for the cars of the future.
Autonomous driving under yellow flags would be entirely feasible

BALANCED BRAKING PERFORMANCE
All the way to the APEX
B ITE
D ECELERATION
THE DRIVER’S
PAD
In addition to the bite and deceleration expected
from a world class race pad, Ferodo pads offer
the superior modulation and instantaneous release
for maximum exit speeds.
www.ferodoracing.com
Circuit Supplies (UK) Ltd , Unit 8, Eden Court,
info@circuitsupplies.com
www.circuitsupplies.com
M ODULATION
R ELEASE
FERODO RACING BRAKE PADS
developed and engineered to perform in all four phases of the braking event.
Eden Way, Leighton Buzzard, Beds LU7 4FY S E L E CT E D R A N G E N OW AVA I L A B L E
Tel: 01525 385 888 • Fax: 01525 385 898 T H E R M A L LY B E D D E D

TECHNOLOGY – F1 AERODYNAMICS
that are able to follow each other and pass
more easily? We fired up the CFD to find out
By SIMON McBEATH
Nothing makes a mess of air quite like an F1 car at full chat – as CFD spaghetti image of
‘2017’ cars shows. This is why it’s difficult for a car to chase another through fast turns
18 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Follow closely
Just how difficult is it to design Formula 1 cars
vertaking in F1 is not as the straights (even without DRS) or in one if, after numerous attempts at been the obvious focus of attention.
common as many would slow corners isn’t a problem. solving or at least reducing it, artificial This feature looks at the first iteration
like. But there seems to be To get in position to execute an means such as DRS and tyres with of a potential solution that would
O widespread agreement overtaking manoeuvre, by definition limited durability were required to entail, in Formula 1 terms, very
that to increase the frequency of the following car must be close facilitate changes of track position to modest costs, and which, as promised
passing it is necessary to make it enough to the car in front in the first supplement overtaking events per in our last study, also sees greater
easier for following cars to be able to place, so the small extra advantage se . Discussion in the sidebar (p61) emphasis on ground effects.
close up on the car in front. needed to draw alongside can then be highlights the various aerodynamic
Artificial aids such as DRS implemented. The not unreasonable factors at which fingers are pointed, First response
and differential tyre degradation precept that follows is that if the but loss of downforce and loss of With such a complex problem
aside, which have little to do with cars could follow more closely on all, aerodynamic balance on a following the resources of an F1 team’s
the execution of skilful overtakes, or at least, more sections of a track car are clearly uppermost. F1 seems aerodynamics department to study
the issue relates particularly to then more overtaking would result. understandably intent on maintaining as wide a range of potential solutions
higher speed corners where the Assuming the precept is valid, what high downforce, so mitigating the as possible would be useful. Such is
aerodynamics play a large role in grip needs to be done to achieve the aim? effects of its loss and its shifting not the case at Racecar Engineering ,
generation, since following closely on The problem is clearly a complex balance on following cars is and has but we are very fortunate to have the
To get in to a position to execute an overtaking manoeuvre, then the
following car must be close enough to the car in front in the first place

Figure 1: RE’s proposed 2017 F1 car
Figure 2: Differences between 2013 and 2017 car – the latter is right half of racecar
Figure 4: Bottom half of image is 2017 racecar
The main aims
Figure 3: Left
Table 1: The aerodynamic data on the 2013 and 2017
F1 racecars at the same rake and ride heights
CD -CL %front -L/D
2013 model 1.173 3.89 45.0 3.32
2017 model 0.96 3.95 45.0 4.11
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 19
resources and skills of Dynamic Flow a BAR Honda 002 F1 car. Furthermore, In greater detail the key changes hence the sidepods were 25mm
Solutions and its director Miqdad adaptations to the model would involved are as follows: lower, lowering the CofG. The
Ali (‘MA’) to make some carefully also enable alternative aerodynamic • Front wing was simplified, diffuser outlet was twice the size
thought through, selective studies on concepts to be studied and compared number of elements kept of the current diffuser and was
aspects that would seem to be likely to the current situation. to three and central neutral 980mm long with a 12-degree
contributors to the problem. For the study in this feature, section retained. Span kept roof angle. There were 25mm
Regular readers will have seen MA’s initial approach to creating an the same (as 2013) and height deep side skirts to assist the
the illuminating CFD studies that improved F1 car for 2017 was, he says: above the ground was the same underbody; these were simple
MA has carried out on a 2013 rules ‘To make minimal changes to existing as before; however, its height extensions of the underbody side
F1 car model using OpenFOAM CFD cars and get positive results. In our was different relative to the step edges protruding towards the
software in our July and October 2015 case it was a lowered nose (in line plane by 25mm. ground with a thickness of 3mm.
issues (V25N7 and V25N10). While with 2015 safety thinking); a simplified • Rear wing span increased to The CAD renderings shown as
working on these studies the idea front wing; a smaller rear wing moved 1000mm with a less aggressive Figures 1 to 4 show the 2017 car
occurred to MA that by using two of rearwards and downwards; the floor profile and camber to fit a compared to the 2013. The main
these 2013 models in line astern the step plane was lowered from 50mm (smaller) 290mm x 110mm side aims then were: to increase the
current problem could be examined to 25mm above the reference plane; elevation box, and it was 170mm underbody’s contribution to overall
(2015 F1 cars are obviously slightly the diffuser outlet area was doubled lower than before and 250mm downforce, and to simultaneously
different to 2013 cars, but the basic and the length increased; the beam rearwards, measured at the reduce upwash in the wake. The first
problem appears to be ongoing), wing was moved backwards; and flap’s trailing edge. CFD runs enabled refinement of
akin to the study in our October 2004 25mm side skirts were fitted on the • The underfloor had a 25mm these basic modifications until the
issue (V14N10) by Advantage CFD on underbody side edges.’ step compared to 50mm before, downforce and balance levels were

TECHNOLOGY – F1 AERODYNAMICS
20 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Figure 5: Downforce contributions on the two cars showing differences between them Figure 6: Drag for both – note 2017 floor contribution in both drag and downforce (Fig 5)
Figure 7: Front view surface pressure coefficient comparison; 2017 on right of image Figure 8: Top view surface pressure coefficient comparison, 2017 bottom of the image
Figure 9: Rear view surface pressure coefficient comparison; 2017 on the left here Figure 10: Surface pressure coefficient comparison; 2017 at the top of image
comparable to the previous 2013 drag contributions were in line with our 2004 article on the BAR Honda right out at eight car lengths, and in
model so that direct comparisons rear wing downforce decreasing and 002 showing similar but not quite both cases this became greater at the
could be made in two-car scenarios. underbody downforce increasing, identical information. Nevertheless, closest separations. The reason for the
This produced a 2017 car with but total drag was lower, hence the at first glance the plots show basic balance shift is equally clear; the front
an -L/D better than the 2013 car, -L/D value increased. Figures 7 to 10 similarities; drag and downforce end lost more downforce than the rear
approximately 45 per cent front show comparisons of surface pressure reduced on the following car, and end with both cars. Irrespective of the
aerodynamic balance and very similar coefficients on the two cars simulated the reductions were greater at losses in total downforce, if the %front
-CL to the 2013 car. Table 1 shows the in CFD. But how would this first ‘F1 smaller separations. One difference reduces then aerodynamic understeer
basic aerodynamic numbers. 2017’ concept fare in two-car line in the curve shapes shows that the would be bound to occur as soon as
Figures 5 and 6 give comparisons astern simulations? First we needed reductions steepened at two car a following car got close to another,
between the sources of downforce comparative data from the 2013 car… length separation on the 2013 car but making it more difficult to exploit the
and drag on the 2013 and the this steepening did not occur until remaining grip to try and stay close,
2017 cars. The proportion of total 2013 cars line astern one car length on the earlier car, so in let alone close up on the car in front
downforce generated by the rear wing Figure 11 shows the changes to each that sense things were slightly worse through an ‘aero’ corner.
was smaller on the 2017 car but the of the main aerodynamic metrics at a on the more recent car.
underbody contribution was bigger; range of longitudinal car separations One key aspect is that balance Steady balance
front wing downforce was roughly from half a car’s length to eight (%front) shifted significantly off the Next, a pair of 2017 cars were put
comparable. The main changes in car lengths, and Figure 12 is from front of the car in both cases from through their paces at the same

High Tech | High Speed | High Quality
Pankl Engine Systems GmbH & Co KG
A member of Pankl Racing Systems
A-8600 Bruck/Mur, Kaltschmidstrasse 2-6
Phone: +43(0)3862 51 250-0
FAX: +43(0)3862 51 250-290
e-mail: engine@pankl.com www.pankl.com

TECHNOLOGY – F1 AERODYNAMICS
glance the results seem broadly similar to our BAR 002 study (see Figure 12, right)
22 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
Figure 12: The changes to the aerodynamic numbers on the BAR Honda 002 (as
Figure 11: The changes to the aerodynamic numbers on our 2013 following car. At first featured in Racecar in 2004) following the car at a range of fore-aft separations
Figure 13: The changes to the aero numbers on our 2017 following car at a range of Figure 14: Changes to front wing comparison. The following 2017 car lost a lot less
fore-aft separations. It seems that the 2017 car punches a smaller hole in the air downforce at all the intermediate separations, which should make it easier for the driver
Figure 15: Comparison of changes to rear wing downforce on the racecar following Figure 16: Comparison of changes to underbody downforce. This shows that the cars
another. Rear wing losses were generally less on the 2017 car than the 2013 car lost roughly comparable proportions of downforce across the range of separations
longitudinal separations and the plot a smaller hole because the total 2017 car lost slightly more downforce a loss of downforce when behind
in Figure 13 was generated. The first downforce reductions were, on than the 2013 car. another car, that loss would be
and most obvious conclusion is that average, smaller; at eight car lengths Perhaps of greater significance smaller and, because there would
the 2017 car also lost downforce when the 2017 car had only lost around though was the almost complete be no change in aerodynamic
following an identical car and, like the 10 per cent of its total downforce absence of balance shift with the balance, there would not be the ‘aero
2013 and the earlier car, it lost more compared to almost 27 per cent for 2017 car right across the range of understeer’ from which the 2013 and
downforce when closer to the car in the 2013 car; at four car lengths the separations, and this was mainly earlier design concepts would have
front. Those are the least surprising of figures were similar at roughly 28 per because the front and rear wing suffered. The combination of these
the findings, given that the leading cent and 30 per cent respectively; downforce decline rates were almost two factors – less downforce loss and
car still punches a hole in the air. and at two car lengths the figures identical across the separation range. no balance change – ought to make it
However, on closer examination it were roughly 30 per cent and 36 So although a following car to this significantly less difficult to run close
appears that the 2017 car punched per cent. At a half a car length the 2017 design would still experience behind another racecar, and hence,

when the race circumstances and the
Governing documents
driver skill allow, easier to get closer
to that leading car.
still quite significant, though, so while
the rate of (unassisted) closing might
There is no apparent ambition to
be slower, hopefully the gap would be
smaller in the first place.
make reductions in downforce
although there was an interesting
‘reduced loss spike’ at one car length
on the 2013 car, perhaps related to
that car’s high rear wing location. And
Figure 16 shows that the underbodies
lost roughly comparable proportions
of their downforce across the range
of separations, except when half a
car length apart, when the 2017 car
actually saw a somewhat greater loss.
Using delta-Cp plots, which
show the differences in surface
pressure coefficients as the result of
changes, we can see how the two
cars responded when following.
Figures 17 and 18 illustrate the
lower and upper surface delta-Cps at
four car lengths separation, at which
the 2013 and 2017 showed roughly
similar reductions in total downforce.
Looking at the underside in Figure
17 it is apparent that the front
wing on the 2017 following car saw
smaller pressure increases (meaning
lesser reductions in suction and
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 23
The differences in how drag he latest FIA ideas on the way So this proposal does not address the Regulation Framework’. We reported
changed on these two cars when forwards for F1 aerodynamics, issue of cars being able to follow one on this in our September 2007
following another were also T some outlined by Charlie another closely and places continued issue (V17N9) and, in a nutshell, the
interesting. At eight car lengths the Whiting in summer 2015, include reliance on tyre degradation and DRS proposed aerodynamic changes
2013 and 2017 cars saw roughly proposals to make 2017 F1 cars five to to facilitate position changes. incorporated a standardised
equal drag reductions of around 7 six seconds per lap faster. This would Seemingly another recent underbody with a forward-biased
per cent; at four car lengths the 2017 apparently be achieved by using proposal from Red Bull was based on centre of pressure that, it was hoped,
car saw a drag reduction of about 10 wider cars; wider front and rear tyres; utilising large underbody tunnels, would reduce an F1 car’s reliance
per cent but the 2013 car saw about wider front and rear wing; and one an idea that the FIA’s (and Racecar on its front wing, making the
20 per cent; at two car lengths the reference suggested a reduction in Engineering’s ) technical consultant aerodynamic balance less sensitive to
reductions were about 16.5 per cent height of the stepped underside plane Peter Wright reported on in this running in another car’s wake. Front
and 25.5 per cent respectively, and by 25mm, to put it 25mm above the magazine in our April 2000 issue and rear wings would be constrained
at one and a half car separations the reference plane beneath the central (V10N3). In reference to expected rule on dimensions and number of
reductions were very similar. Would chassis, rather than the 50mm it has changes at the time he said: ‘On the elements, and would also be ‘active’ to
these smaller drag reductions at the been since 1995. table for 2001 is less pitch-sensitive enable high downforce in corners but
bigger separations make it more However, Whiting was quoted as and reduced downforce aerodynamics low drag on straights. Interestingly,
difficult to ‘slipstream’ the 2017 car on saying that he doubted these changes using venturi sidepods but no diffuser, ‘aerodynamic balance’ appeared in
a straight? The drag reductions were would result in more overtaking and a raised front wing and limits on the both these earlier references as a
In more detail saw no reason for changes on that number of elements making up the significant contributor to the difficulty
Let’s examine the changes and their front anyway. ‘Most of the technical rear wing. The rules are somewhat in following closely.
causes in more detail. The plots guys feel the work done by the similar to those used in CART [IndyCar The same paper also suggested
in Figures 14 to 16 show direct Overtaking Working Group [OWG] predecessor] where it has been found in a graphic (below) that the factors
comparisons between downforce back in 2008, in preparation for 2009, that not only do venturi sidepods involved were; high downforce; high
reductions on the 2013 and 2017 was very small by comparison to encourage longer side impact dependence on the front wing; and
cars’ main downforce-inducing the two major factors now, which structures but also help to maintain high induced drag (drag generated
components. In Figure 14 we see are tyre degradation and DRS. Those aerodynamic balance in the wake of by downforce-generating devices,
that the front wing of the following two things will probably outweigh another car on high speed ovals.’ especially the rear wing). Given that
2017 car lost a lot less downforce at all anything the OWG did, so we will still Clearly that particular concept there is no apparent ambition to make
the intermediate separations, which have those,’ he told Autosport.com . ‘If, never materialised but the notion reductions in downforce, which would
would surely make life less difficult for as some people think, it may be a little re-appeared in modified form in threaten F1’s position at the pinnacle
the driver of a following car. Figure more difficult to follow a car closely an FIA document Wright jointly of motorsport performance, the other
15 shows that rear wing losses were then we can increase the authority of authored with Tony Purnell in 2007 parameters identified don’t seem to
generally less on the 2017 car too, the DRS. I don’t see a big issue there.’ entitled ‘Formula One 2011: Chassis tally with current FIA proposals …

TECHNOLOGY – F1 AERODYNAMICS
Dynamic Flow Solutions
British touring cars, Le Mans
prototypes, up through to F1
and Land Speed Record cars. Ex-MIRA aero man Miqdad Ali (‘MA’)
Contact:
24 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
of better performance from the outer Summary
parts of the wing. Figure 19 , a vertical We have clearly seen with these CFD
slice 500mm from the following insights why current and recent F1
car centrelines at two car lengths aero packages make life difficult
Figure 17: Comparison of changes to surface pressure coefficients on the two cars’ Figure 18: Comparison of changes to surface pressure coefficients on the two
undersides at four car lengths separation – the 2017 car is at the top in this image cars’ top surfaces at four car lengths separation – 2017 is again at top of image
Figure 19: A slice 500mm from the racecar centreline of total pressure on the following Figure 20: Transverse slice at the front wing leading edge of total pressure – the energy
car at two car lengths of separation – the 2017 racecar is at the bottom of this image of the airflow reaching outer portion of the 2017 (left) front wing was generally higher
hence smaller losses of downforce). greater increases of pressure under showing greater reductions of positive edges of the two following cars at
Interestingly though, these smaller its forward underbody, from the pressure, again translating into two car lengths separation, shows the
losses were on the outer portions leading edge of the splitter to the greater losses of front end downforce. energy of the airflow reaching most
of the 2017 car’s wing and flaps and front quarter of the wider flat floor Elsewhere there are relatively minor of the outer portion of the 2017 car’s
under the end plate’s footplate, when under the sidepods. The 2017 car’s local differences between the two front wing was generally higher.
we might have expected the reduced underbody pressure increases were cars except perhaps on the top of the In other words, the 2017 design is
upwash to have reduced the losses at more evenly spread along its length. rear tyre of the 2013 car, which saw giving the front wing of the following
the centre of the wing. Nevertheless, These two differences would have an increase in pressure (which would car an easier time.
we can now see why and where further contributed to the greater translate as a reduction in lift). MA is confident further
the front end of the 2017 following proportionate loss of front downforce As mentioned above, the reduced modifications to the rear of the 2017
car lost less downforce at these on the 2013 car. Figure 18 shows downforce losses of the front wing of car would enable reductions in the
intermediate separations. the delta-Cps on the upper surfaces the 2017 car when following another amount of ‘dirty’ air reaching the front
Moving aft to the floor and and once more there are differences car seemed from the delta-Cp plots wing of the following car.
diffuser, the 2013 following car saw on the front wing, the 2013 car in Figures 17 and 18 to be the result
ynamic Flow Solutions separation, shows total pressure (total for a following car. We have also
Ltd is an aerodynamics energy) and gives more insight into demonstrated how a straightforward
D consultancy led by why this was the case. It is clear that re-design producing more downforce
director Miqdad Ali, an ex-MIRA the air that encounters the front wing from ground effects and less from
aerodynamicist who has performed in the 2017 following car case at this wings – that could be very cheaply
design, development, simulation distance from the centreline had incorporated onto existing cars –
and test work at all levels of greater energy than in the 2013 car. overcame a key part of the problem.
professional motorsport, from Figure 20 , a transverse slice of total Thanks to Dynamic Flow Solutions
junior formula cars to World and pressure near the front wing leading for its help with this piece.
is the boss of Dynamic Flow Solutions The 2017 car’s underbody
miqdad.ali@dynamic-flow.co.uk pressure increases were more
www.dynamic-flow.co.uk evenly spread along its length

is a full service supplier to the Motorsport Community.
We provide technical facility engineering, construction, operations, and maintenance services for the motorsport
community’s most complex testing, research, and development facilities. Our consulting services range from test
planning to computer simulation. We provide aerodynamic/flow analysis including aerodynamic validation of safety
enhancements, stress and thermal analysis, and acoustic analysis. Our facility control software, Test SLATE, offers a
proven solution for integrating diverse software and systems. We can help you create success in your next project.
M
O
Leading manufacturers to the racing Services
industry for over 60 years - Formula,
Aluminium and Copper Brass built to
your design requirements or in house
C o n
D
B
Sunoco Race Fuel Stockist and Supply
with over 40 years of winning experience
Sunoco provide the very best in Leaded
and Unleaded Racing Fuels and Now...
Line and Slim Line Oil Coolers in the UK
and supply to our customers worldwide.
Setrab Oil Coolers are the highest in
Quality and Performance and with our off
the shelf stock range available we can
provide you with any cooler you require for
your High Performance needs.
Units 8-10 Bullsbrook Road, Brook Industrial Estate,
Hayes, Middlesex, UB40JZ, England
T: 0208 813 7470/0208 5611508 M: 07831 327654
www.serckservicesmotorsport.co.uk
600 William Northern Blvd. • Tullahoma, TN 37388 USA • Phone: +1 931.455.6400 • Fax: +1 931.393.6211 • www.jacobstechnology.com • www.testslate.com
Manufacturing Heat Exchanger and with more fuel choice than ever before.
Servicing all types of coolers to the Delivered directly to your door.
GT, LE Mans, Drag Racing, Historic racing industry for 15 years with Flow
Formula, Touring Car, Rally and Testing, Pressure Testing and Micron
Classic Racing. Photo Analysis design and supplied to
Formula One worldwide, Le Mans and
Touring Car. We can count as little as
design and We are the Sole Importer for Setrab Pro

The UK’s largest meeting place for advanced
engineering professionals
Join us where the familiar and the unfamiliar collide to
provide new opportunities across the engineering supply
Advanced Engineering is the industry event where
high-technology manufacturing sectors converge under
one roof to meet and do business.
aerospace but from automotive and other
Robert Richards,
BDM, Metrology
Software Products
BDM, Metrology
Software Products
Contact us about exhibiting today
“Fantastic…I think this “…the corridors
is the best year yet” and they are our
Dave Withey, Graham Mulholland,
Senior Project Engineer, Research, Managing Director,
Jaguar Land Rover epm: technology group
Mark
“It was fantastic to meet with like-
“Fantastic…I think this “…the corridors have been full all the time,
is the best year yet” and they are our decision makers”
Dave Withey, Graham Mulholland, “It w
Senior Project Engineer, Research, Managing Director,
Jaguar Land Rover “Fantastic show - lots of interest, not just from epm: technology group min
“Fantastic show - lots of interest, not just from minded people - especially in motor
aerospace but from automotive and other sports and hybrid power…We’ve
sectors” got some great leads to follow up”
Robert Richards, Mark Harbord, Sales & Marketing Manager, LCL Electronics
+44 (0)20 8843 8800 or visit www.advancedengineeringuk.com

WRITE LINE – PETER WRIGHT
he has become annoyed. when the great slip-
I do wonder what has become of the ‘racing’ streaming circuits ceased
in ‘motor racing’. Given the brief to sort it out to be used in the early
quickly, I would decide to concentrate on just 1970s, overtaking
Average number of overtaking manoeuvres per
Average number of overtaking manoeuvres per race race.
Average no. of manoeuvres.
1955 1965 1975 Year 1985 1995 2005
FORMULA 1 2016 www.racecar-engineering.com 27
The laps of the gods
A view from Olympus on F1’s lack of real racing – and what might be done about it
ormula 1 seems to be in such a state of this issue, as overtaking means uncertainty, and reduced by around 60 per cent from an average of
schizophrenia that everyone and anyone can uncertainty means entertainment (us gods are 20 a race. Second, overtaking reached a minimum
F offer solutions to what is fundamentally a lack good at broad, sweeping statements). in the mid-1970s, and then nearly doubled again by
of interest in the younger generation. In fact, it is My first port of call would be to go and find the mid-1980s. Finally, from then on it fell steadily
not just the young; Gerhard Berger admitted that Jabby Crombac, the late editor of Sport Auto , over the next decade to an absolute minimum
he falls asleep watching Formula 1 once he knows who attended all grands prix from 1955 until just of two to three per race.
who will win, usually after the first few corners. before he died in 2005. He maintained, by hand, Why? In the early 1970s, wing-generated
Rather than plunge headlong into this melee, a rigorously accurate lap chart of each GP. In 1998 downforce was being steadily developed, with drag
I am going to ask you to momentarily suspend (yes, really, overtaking was a subject for debate less important, due to the absence of the very fast
belief and imagine I am the God of Sport, residing 18 years ago) he undertook to use this database circuits. Overtaking reduced.
on Mount Olympus. Imagine Zeus has just given to calculate the number of changes of position in In the late 1970s, ground effect with skirts
me instructions to go and sort out F1, as he is sick each GP, each year, as noted as the cars cross the entered the arena and front wings shrunk, acting
of the whinging of mortals. The brief is to take no start/finish line. This data was condensed down to mainly as trim tabs. The overtaking then increased.
account of the politics or commercial self-interests, an average number of such manoeuvres per year, In 1981, sliding skirts were banned, though
and on no account to form a committee or working as can be seen in the chart below. fought over until 1983 when flat bottoms were
group to decide what to do. Having observed mandated. From that year on the front wing
motor racing over the last 100 or so years, and seen Draft excluders became the dominant aerodynamic feature on
the highest level become the Formula 1 of today, Certain features are immediately apparent. First; Formula 1 cars, and overtaking declined steadily.
Many believe F1 is not exciting these days beyond the cut and thrust of the first lap – but might there be a way to improve the racing by changing the aero regulations?

WRITE LINE – PETER WRIGHT
Average overtaking per race
Reducing downforce
28 www.racecar-engineering.com FORMULA 1 2016
y=13.039-0.35484*x^.5
Average no. of overtaking manoeuvres per race
Average number of overtaking manoeuvres per race .v. Front wing downforce (1972-1997) v front wing downforce (1972 - 1997)
Front wing downforce (lbf @ 150 mph)
Plotting average overtaking manoeuvres/race With freedom regarding the rest of the where the majority of overtakes are set up would
against front wing downforce generates a clear aerodynamics of the car, with the exception of be extended. Lap times will be increased to five
trend, as seen on the chart on the following page. no skirts and dimensional limitations such as rear to six seconds a lap by the reduced downforce,
Unfortunately, Jabby’s analysis was never wing width and overall height, the efforts of the but some of this will be clawed back by reduced
extended to the present day, but we can probably hundreds of aerodynamicists would be re-focused drag and increased mechanical grip, unleashed
predict what it would look like up until the time onto: drag reduction at the CLA limit; minimising by the lower aerodynamic loads Why is lap time
that DRS and Pirelli tyres reinstated overtaking. the effect of disturbances from the car in front in so important anyway? It is like 0-60mph times of
order to enable overtaking; and, inevitably, how to supercars – only important on paper.
The culprits tune the aerodynamics to make it more difficult for Strategy Working Group attempts to increase
Most people know that the front wings, elaborate the car behind to overtake. downforce have been thwarted by the inevitable
multi-element devices, are the culprits, yet F1 itself The downforce and drag lap time sensitivity response by Pirelli that the tyres will become harder
is unable to do anything about them. Time for a values of a Formula 1 car at a high downforce and and less grippy. So isn’t it obvious that there is a
thunderbolt then. Limit front wings drastically, tough-to-overtake circuit such as Barcelona, are need for us to go in the opposite direction?
controlled by size and number of elements – max in the ratio of around 4.3 to 1, downforce to drag.
one or two at the most. Then we should limit This means that the return in terms of lap time on New direction
overall CLA to, say, 50 to 60 per cent of current aerodynamic research and development effort Reducing downforce and drag will take the
values, or maybe even less. would be significantly less than at present, where pressure off the quest for more power. Current
The first can be regulated dimensionally, the the concentrated effort is on downforce, and so powertrains are 850-900cv, and teenagers can
second requires the measurement of downforce on rich teams would have less of an advantage manage them. Does anyone really think another
track, normalised with pitot pressure, and limited compared to the smaller teams. 200cv is going to sort the men from the boys?
to an FIA-monitored, never-exceed figure. All the This would focus the efforts of the If powertrain changes are needed after three to
teams have the means to measure downforce aerodynamicists on to aero-efficiency, in much four years, then I would ask the manufacturers
precisely, to a level where they are able to confirm the same way the fuel flow regulation focuses the what features they would like to change to
or otherwise a driver’s feeling that he has lost powertrain engineers on to thermal efficiency. make them more relevant to road cars and
downforce, either due to damage or rubber The reduction in downforce would allow larger, increase thermal efficiency. One day, when the
blocking the front wing’s flap slots. The FIA can grippier tyres, and so the increase in overall lap time bones of motorsport are being picked over, the
have access to this data, and the teams would would be compensated for. Drivers complain about engineering skills of the F1 manufacturers will
have to ensure that downforce never went over the heat degradation characteristics of the current be compared with those in WEC LMP1, and those
that CLA value. Pirelli tyres, pushing for cars they can drive flat out achieving the greatest thermal efficiency will be
until the tyres wear out. Drivers drive flat out in declared the winners.
qualifying, and then line up in the order of speed. If And that’s it. The change towards a limited,
they could then race flat out, the field would slowly reduced downforce would send Formula 1 in
stretch out, with no overtaking bar errors. What is a whole new development direction. It would
and drag will take the the good of that? increase overtaking ability, make the cars more
Reducing the downforce, and hence the drag, difficult to drive, prevent speeds escalating to
pressure off the quest which would be further reduced by aero R&D the safety limits of the circuits, and yet be more
focusing on efficiency, will increase the top speeds relevant to road car technology.
for more power and reduce grip under braking. Thus the area Right, I wonder what Bacchus is up to …

Formula One
Medical
Moto GP
World Touring
Cars
Le Mans
World Rally Car
Indycar
Home Audio
Automotive
Paralympics
Low Friction Wheel Rim Seals
NEW Compact Water Pump Seals
High Vacuum Engine Seals
High Speed KERS / Generator / Turbo Seals
Fuel & Coolant Accumulator Bladders
Low Friction Transmission Seals
Bespoke Compact CV Boots
Precision elastomeric products
www.hscomposites.co.uk | +44 (0)1869 243254